Title: Clear
Authors: 
Categories: basics
Date: 2017-12-28 20:05:00
ID: 1.1.6
Modified: 2017-12-28 20:05:00
Path: Using Mathematica/Basics
Slug: clear
Tags: clear

<a id="clear" style="width:0;height:0;margin:0;padding:0;">&zwnj;</a>

## Clear

Before we can really begin working with Mathematica we also need to discuss the function  ```Clear``` , which can be a life-saver.

It just removes any definitions we’ve given to a symbol, which can be a bigger deal than one might think. Consider the following case: 

	aVariableIUsedBefore=1000;

	aVariableIUsedBefore[x_]:=x*10;


<div class='mma-message'>
	<span class='mma-message-name'>SetDelayed::write:</span>
	<span class='mma-message-text'>Tag Integer in 1000[x_] is Protected.</span>
</div>

Notice we get an error because the way Mathematica reads this, we’re trying to assign a function to the number 1000.

Here, though, all we need to do is use  ```Clear```  and we’re good to go.

	Clear[aVariableIUsedBefore]

Sometimes we’ve made a lot of definitions and we want to  ```Clear```  them all, just to prevent hard to find errors from cropping up. In this case we can do the following:

	Clear["Global`*"]

What this does is removes all the definitions for any symbol that looks like  ```Global`symbolName```  which is usually every symbol we’ve defined.

Sometimes we want to protect some symbols, like fundamental constants, from being erased. In this case we just need to make a symbol that doesn’t look like  ```Global`symbolName``` . A useful way to do this is to put the type of thing it is before it:

<pre >
<code>
Constant`PlanckConstant = 6.626*10<sup>-34</sup> (*J×s*);
</code>
</pre>

This sort of thing is discussed more at length in the Contexts section, but first let’s just see that this does what we want it to. First let’s define a bunch of things:

	a = 100;
	b = 2.50;
	c[x_] = RandomReal[]*x;
	x[x_] := x[x];

	a
	b
	c[10]
	x[10]

	(*Out:*)
	
	100

	(*Out:*)
	
	2.5`

	(*Out:*)
	
	9.548010769916973`

	(*Out:*)
	
	10[10]

And now we’ll clear them:

	Clear["Global`*"]

	a
	b
	c[10]
	x[10]

	(*Out:*)
	
	a

	(*Out:*)
	
	b

	(*Out:*)
	
	c[10]

	(*Out:*)
	
	x[10]

But our constant is fine:

	Constant`PlanckConstant

	(*Out:*)
	
	6.6260000000000015`*^-34

And for those who don’t want to type out a long name every time they use this constant in a problem, here’s a trick: use some variable just for the problem to which you assign the value of the constant. e.g:

<pre >
<code>
Constant`SpeedOfLight=3*10<sup>8</sup>(*m/s*);
</code>
</pre>

	h = Constant`PlanckConstant;
	c = Constant`SpeedOfLight;
	λ = 1*10^-3 (*m*);

	h*c/λ (*J*)

	(*Out:*)
	
	1.9878000000000004`*^-22

Then just clear all of this before starting the next problem:

	Clear["Global`*"]

And now none of that can leak into the next problem:

	h
	c
	λ

	(*Out:*)
	
	h

	(*Out:*)
	
	c

	(*Out:*)
	
	λ