Title: System`*`
Authors: 
Categories: reference-guides,undocumented-contexts
Date: 2018-07-17 14:34:37
ID: 4.1.4
Modified: 2018-07-17 15:12:42
Path: Reference Guides/Undocumented Contexts/
Slug: system-*
Tags: undocumented

<a id="system" style="width:0;height:0;margin:0;padding:0;">&zwnj;</a>

## System`*`

The  ```"System`*`"```  contexts provide similar functionality to the  ```"Internal`*`"```  context in terms of low-level usage.

There are a huge number of these contexts, so we'll just focus on a few of them.

<a id="systemprivate" style="width:0;height:0;margin:0;padding:0;">&zwnj;</a>

## System`Private`

### SetNoEntry

This is a special function that tags an expression as being treated as atomic (i.e. it cannot be "entered" by  ```Part``` )

See  [here](https://mathematica.stackexchange.com/a/139974/38205)

### NoEntryQ

This tests whether an expression has had  ```SetNoEntry```  called on it

### EntryQ

Opposite of  ```NoEntryQ```

### HoldSetNoEntry

```SetNoEntry```  but with held argument

### HoldEntryQ

```EntryQ```  but with held argument

### ConstructNoEntry

Constructs an atomic object, rather than having this set after the fact

### Arguments

Collects the arguments to an expression and checks that the number of them is within an expected range. It holds its first argument.

* Single Number

    System`Private`Arguments[test[1, 2, 3], 3]

    (*Out:*)
    
    {{1,2,3},{}}

* Variable Number

    System`Private`Arguments[test[1, 2], {2, 3}]

    (*Out:*)
    
    {{1,2},{}}

* Different  ```Head```

    System`Private`Arguments[test[1, 2, 3], 3, Hold]

    (*Out:*)
    
    {Hold[1,2,3],Hold[]}

* With  ```Options```

    Options[test]={"Option1"->1, "Option2"->2};
    System`Private`Arguments[test[1, 2, 3, "Option1"->2], 3, Hold]

    (*Out:*)
    
    {Hold[1,2,3],Hold["Option1"->2]}

* Bad option

    Options[test]={"Option1"->1, "Option2"->2};
    System`Private`Arguments[test[1, 2, 3, "Option"->2], 3, Hold]


<div class='mma-message'>
 <span class='mma-message-name'>test::optx:</span>
 <span class='mma-message-text'>Unknown option "Option" in test[1,2,3,"Option"->2].</span>
</div>

    (*Out:*)
    
    {}

* Incorrect Number

    System`Private`Arguments[test[1, 2, 3], 5]


<div class='mma-message'>
 <span class='mma-message-name'>test::argrx:</span>
 <span class='mma-message-text'>test called with 3 arguments; 5 arguments are expected.</span>
</div>

    (*Out:*)
    
    {}

### ArgumentsWithRules

Like  ```Arguments```  but reports that it expects to have options if too many non-option arguments are passed:

    System`Private`ArgumentsWithRules[test[1, 2, 3, 4, "Option1"->4], 3]


<div class='mma-message'>
 <span class='mma-message-name'>test::nonopt:</span>
 <span class='mma-message-text'>Options expected (instead of 4) beyond position 3 in test[1,2,3,4,"Option1"->4]. An option must be a rule or a list of rules.</span>
</div>

    (*Out:*)
    
    {}

<a id="systemutilities" style="width:0;height:0;margin:0;padding:0;">&zwnj;</a>

## System`Utilities`

These tend to be a bit more developer oriented than many of the  ```"System`Private`"```  functions and a bit higher-level.

### SymbolList

Extracts the list of symbols in an expression. Doesn't hold its argument.

* All symbols

    System`Utilities`SymbolList[a[b[c[d]]]]

    (*Out:*)
    
    {d,b,a,c}

* Wrapped in a  ```Head```

    System`Utilities`SymbolList[a[b[c[d]]], Hold]

    (*Out:*)
    
    {Hold[d],Hold[b],Hold[a],Hold[c]}

* Ignored contexts

    System`Utilities`SymbolList[Hold@Print@Hold@Print@a[b[c[d]]], Hold, {"System`"}]

    (*Out:*)
    
    {Hold[d],Hold[b],Hold[a],Hold[c]}

### HashTable

Makes a new  ```HashTable```  object. Less useful since version 10 with the introduction of  ```Association``` .

See  [here](https://mathematica.stackexchange.com/a/1029/38205)

### HashTableAdd

### HashTableGet

### HashTableRemove

Bits of the  ```HashTable```  API