Title: Flow Control
Authors: 
Categories: mathematica-programming,code-structure
Date: 2018-07-16 22:25:47
ID: 2.1.11
Modified: 2018-07-16 23:27:15
Path: Mathematica Programming/Code Structure
Slug: flow-control
Tags: flow-control

Mathematica, being primarily a functional programming language, doesn't use standard flow-control techniques such as  [```While```](https://reference.wolfram.com/language/ref/While.html) ,  [```Break```](https://reference.wolfram.com/language/ref/Break.html) ,  [```Continue```](https://reference.wolfram.com/language/ref/Continue.html) ,  [```etc```](https://reference.wolfram.com/language/guide/FlowControl.html) . to the same degree that a primarily procedural language like python does.

Despite that, these are still useful things to know how to work with. We'll go through them pretty quickly, one-by-one.

### While

Of all of these,  ```While```  is likely the most common to be used, although as mentioned previously it can be emulated perhaps more cleanly by  [```Do```](https://reference.wolfram.com/language/ref/Do.html)  with  ```Infinity```  as the iterator spec.

On the other hand, particularly in the context of  ```Compile```  or other cases where a predominantly procedural paradigm is use,  ```While```  can be useful.

### For

```For```  is never useful. Any time it could be used  ```Table```  or  ```Do```  would be a better choice.

### Break / Continue / Return

As noted,  ```For```  isn't useful, which renders moot the primary use case of  ```Break```  and  ```Continue``` .  They can potentially still be useful in  ```Do```  and  ```Table``` , though.

All Mathematica functions have an implicit  ```Return```  in them, which makes use of  ```Return```  infrequent, but it has its place. Especially when there are multiple possible points of exit from a function  ```Return```  can be highly useful.

It also helpfully has a second argument specifying the scope from which the value should be returned, which can allow for somewhat more targeted usage in, say  ```Do``` .

Similarly,  ```FixedPoint```  and other nested functional programming constructs provide support for  ```Return``` ,  ```Break``` , and potentially  ```Continue``` .